to the stage, Troy Dawson,
3D API engineer for Apple.
I'm with the OpenGL group at Apple,
and today I'll introduce four
rendering techniques to produce
interesting graphics effects
on Mac OS X using OpenGL.
These protects will be
cube environment mass,
improved texture filtering,
using .3 texture combining
to do bump mapping.
And finally,
I'll talk about central shadow volumes.
[Transcript missing]
is the founder of OpenGL.
He's also the founder of
the OpenGL environment.
He's been working on a
number of new features,
including a new environment environment
map to map environment lighting
effects onto a rendered object.
As you can see,
this is a spherical environment map.
Both the front half and the back half
We use this texture combined with
OpenGL's texture combining operations
and the automatic coordinate generation
to simply render the environment
map onto the rendered object,
as you can see here.
So that was environment maps.
Next,
we'll talk about cube and texture maps.
This is a cube texture map.
As you can see,
there's multiple faces of the images.
The images are arranged
in a cube structure.
For use as an environment map,
the cube texture map must have the faces
arranged to form a cubic panorama that
shows the scene as you turn the object.
Using cube maps is very similar to
using regular two-dimensional textures.
Instead of glTextImage2D,
we use a new constant,
which is textureCubeMap.
And as you can see,
the texture parameters are
very similar to using regular
two-dimensional textures.
After we've bound our texture map object,
we need to download the textures.
Downloading the textures images to
the texture objects are very similar.
We have these six new constants.
Each constant corresponds
to a face of the cube map.
And as you can see here,
I just go through the six
constants and download them.
These are cube maps,
so the width and height
must be identical.
Rendering the QMaps is much simplified
if we do use OpenGL's texture
coordinate generation facility.
For Cubemaps,
we'll bind our texture object.
We'll set the texture generation
to Reflection Map mode.
And we enable Cubemap generation.
We enable the texture
coordinate generation.
If you note here,
there are three dimensions to
texture coordinate generation,
while spherical map mode
uses two dimensions.
Now I have a demo.
This is from the NVIDIA site.
This is the NVIDIA Bubble demo,
modified with local scenery.
As you can see here, I have a bubble.
This bubble is a cube map environment.
I can rotate around the scene and
you can see the environment being
reflected on the surface of the sphere.
It works in all dimensions,
both vertically...
I can show you the actual texture images.
Here are the six texture
images of the cube map.
As you can see,
it does form a contiguous panorama of the
scene as viewed from the rendered object.
We can compare this
panorama to a spherical map.
Here you see the corresponding
spherical map that was
generated from these six images.
As you can see, it has less information
than the cube map.
Roughly 40% of the texture
map area is representing the
front half of the environment,
while the next 40% is representing
the back half of the environment.
The black areas are wasted space,
which is about 20% of the spherical map.
This inferior texture mapping
results in poor rendering quality.
Here you can compare the
spherical map and the cube maps.
So this is the cube map environment.
This is a spherical map.
There's cube and spherical.
So the quality is different.
and noticeably better for the cube map.
Additionally, because cube maps are
not view-independent,
you can see I have a very
beautiful back view here.
But if I were to go
back to spherical maps,
you can see that there's a singularity
at the back of the texture,
which results in this
rather poor rendering.
So in summary,
we saw that texture maps for using,
using cube maps for
texture environments are,
was better than spherical maps,
mainly because they're
easier to generate.
Basically, spherical maps are generated
from the cube maps,
so if we skip that step,
we can probably do it faster.
Additionally, the texture maps for QMaps
are viewer independent.
So it's not sitting there at the back.
Next I'll look at anisotropic filtering.
You may have noticed in your
applications that when you have
a texture that's using mipmaps,
when the texture becomes
a bleak to the viewer,
you might notice that
it has blurring effects.
This is due to OpenGL subsampling
the mipmap levels a little
bit less than optimal.
: OpenGL has a new texture
parameter which will allow
you to improve this sampling.
Here it is.
If the driver supports texture--
supports your anastropic filtering,
you can use this function call to
get the maximum supported value.
This number will range from 1
to some number like 8 or 16.
The greater the available value,
the better the texture
filtering effect available.
All you do to use this abstract filtering
is use this texture parameter set
value and you set it to desired value.
The value set must range from one
up to the maximum available value.
Another demo.
Here I have a test image.
Currently I'm using binary filtering.
So when I move the text image down,
You can see some sparkling effects.
OpenGL provides trilinear filtering
to remove sparkling effects,
but as you can see,
when you use trilinear filtering,
the texture becomes blurred,
which isn't so good.
However,
if I raise the on-stop filtering level,
you can see that the image becomes sharp
even when it's viewed at a bleak angle.
I have another image.
Here we see Tri-Linux Filter blurs out.
By using the Anisotropic
Filter parameter,
we can see it's clear again.
We saw how using the anisotropic
texture filter parameter will
improve your texture filtering when
the texture is viewed obliquely.
But this does require
a map texture loading.
But you can set the desired level.
Because using this
anatopic filtering will--
will give you a performance
hit for fill rate.
So you may need to reduce the level
to keep your performance rate.
The next is using the OpenGL Texture
Combiner machinery to produce
a per pixel dot product effect.
Here's an overview of the process.
The OpenGL Texture Combiner API allows
you to use texture stages to do
certain texture combined operations.
As you can see here,
we have three inputs to the
texture combiners and two stages.
The first stage will operate
on the primary color operand
and a texture operand.
The output of the first stage will
be given to the second stage to
produce our final rendered image.
Let's look at the actual dot product.
The dot-free-texture function operand
for the GeoTexture combiner units
will allow the texture units
to do a per-pixel operation.
This is kind of a hack in that we have
to encode the vectors of the dot product
into both color and a texture map.
As you know,
a dot product takes two vectors
and does a dot product operation to
produce a diffuse lighting effect.
The output of the dot product
will be a scalar value,
but we can duplicate the scalar value
to make the output be a light map.
To calculate the local light vector
from the polygon to the light source,
we can use this math.
It's pretty simple.
But the dot product operation
requires that the light vector
be in local coordinate space.
So we must rotate this light by the
inverse rotation of the polygon.
In my code, I use quaternions.
So mine looks like this.
But I don't have a typo in my code,
hopefully.
After we rotate the local
light vector into the local
coordinate space of the polygon,
we have to encode the light vector
into RGB color coordinate space.
This is done like this.
Here I'm using inside bytes
as the color components.
As you can probably figure out,
the color components are
mapped from 0 to 255.
So a -1 vector component will map to 0,
and a +1 vector component
will map to 255.
Additionally,
you can do this encoding for all
the vertices of your polygon.
Here we have the second
operand of the first stage.
This is the normal map operand.
This texture map image,
each pixel of this texture map image
encodes a single surface normal.
The texture map image is blue because the
blue component of the color corresponds
to the direction out of the screen.
Usually these surface normal maps
textures are produced during your
content creation phase by the artist who
has a height map and you apply a tool to
convert the height map to a normal map.
Let's look at the first stage.
As described previously, we have
The first operand,
which will be the local light vector.
Our second operand will
be the encoded normal map.
Here we set the operation
to dot operation.
Additionally, the first texture stage for
the dot-free combiner will
allow you to scale the output,
but I'll show you the code next.
Here's the code that
corresponds to the first stage.
: We're using the first
texture unit as the normal map.
So we bind the normal map
to the first texture unit.
Additionally, we set the texture
combine operation to .3.
The output of the .3 can
either be a scalar value alpha,
or it can be an RGB.
Here I set the output to be an RGB value.
And then finally I set the
two operands of the operation.
The result is the-- would be
the grayscale output you see
here for the dot-p result.
The second stage of the operation
simply modulates the output
against an unlit-based texture.
Here's the code that
corresponds to the second stage.
I'm using the second texture
unit for the base image.
And again,
I set the combiner operation to modulate.
Then I set the first operand
to be the previous output.
Second operand will be the base texture.
Next we'll see the code.
It actually renders the image.
It's a lot of code there,
so let's look at one vertex.
: First I issued the local light vector,
which is an unsigned byte vector.
: Then I simply issue the two
sets of texture coordinates
from the source textures.
As you notice,
for each vertex of the polygon,
I issue a separate light
vector in the color.
You can calculate these light
vectors for each vertex of
the polygon and issue it like
: I'm going to show you how to use
the vertex and texture program to
interpret the normals across the polygon.
If the smooth blending mode is enabled,
we can use the vertex
However, you have to, uh,
there are issues about keeping
the vectors normalized,
but there are ways to get around that.
Now I have a demo.
Here I have a positional light
source circling the source texture.
You can see a purposeful light effect,
perhaps.
Let's move in so we can see it better.
This polygon is simple
for vertex polygon.
There is no geometry.
But because of dot-tree-texture combined,
we can see the lighting change
depending on the local light vector.
I can show you the colors that
correspond to the local light vector.
Here you can see the color change.
These colors are the
encoded local light vectors.
Here you can see... Bizarre.
Here you can see the geometry
of the polygon is flat.
So in summary,
you saw how you can use the
OpenGL texture combine API to do
a diffuse lighting effect using
texture units instead of geometry.
This requires you to produce
your normal map as a texture.
And it's required to calculate the
local light vector for each vertex.
Or you can calculate the local
light vector for the polygon.
Finally, we have stencil shadow volumes.
Is that the time?
Oh well.
This is going to be a quick session.
I like shadows.
Shadows are cool.
Using sense of shadow volumes will
allow you to do this dynamically.
Using the Stencil Buffer to do
shadows requires employing a
Stencil Buffer and a Stencil Test.
As you can see, a Stencil Test is part
of the Pixel Pipeline.
It's a new feature in Mac OS X.
We'll use the Depth Test and the
Stencil Test for this operation.
The operation can be simple or
complex depending on your application.
But the basic steps is to first
render your scene geometry normally,
both color and depth.
Then we construct our shadow volume.
Then we stenciled this shadow
volume into the stencil buffer,
and we used a stencil mask
to render either a lighting
effect or a shadowing effect,
depending on your technique.
First step is to actually
construct our shadow volumes.
This can be very application specific,
so I'm going to hand wave it a bit.
General idea,
this is our positional light source.
And this is an occluding object.
We just will construct a separate
shadow volume that will be extruded
from the including object in the
direction away from the light source.
It's important that this shadow
volume encompass the full scene
geometry you wish to have shadowed.
After we have made our shadow volume,
we will stencil it with a pretty
simple two-step operation.
and at the end of the stencil operation,
we'll have a stencil buffer where
the stencil buffer will have non-zero
values where the scene geometry
intersects the shadow volume.
Here's the code for that.
Stencil operation only requires
writing to the stencil buffer,
not so we disable the
color and depth rights.
Next I will set up the stencil operation.
The GL invert operand is important.
This will set the stencil
test action of the depth pass.
to invert the stencil buffer when the
depth pass is for your rendered volume.
Next,
I simply render our shadow volume twice.
First the back faces and the front faces.
Then I would reset the phrase state.
After we have rendered
our stencil buffer,
stencil mask, we have several options to
get the lighting effect.
Perhaps the simplest is rendering
a two-dimensional overlay
polygon with a shadow color
and then using alpha blending.
This works well,
but does leave one artifact where
the scene geometry within the shadow
volume will still exhibit diffuse
and specular lighting effects,
which may not be what you want.
To avoid that,
you can do more complicated
multi-pass scene rendering,
where you render first an unlit scene,
then use a stencil mask you've created
for your shadow volumes to mask out
the diffuse and speculating effects.
This will slow your rendering down.
Or you can do what I do.
Just render your shadow volume again into
the color buffer using alpha blending.
I'll show you that now.
Here we have a sphere
inside a shadow volume.
I'll show you the shadow volume.
As you might be able to see,
the shadow volume fully encompasses
both the sphere and the ground plane.
This produces the shadow effect.
I can move the ball inside
and out of the sphere.
Here you can see the shadow
effect of the sphere.
If I disable the depth test,
the stencil test, like this,
you can see how I render
the shadow volume.
This shot of all I'm using
an 85% opaque alpha blend.
So you can see the specular
and diffuse lighting.
If I use 50% opaque opacity,
here you can see the effect
is much more noticeable.
But if you use 85%, it's not too bad.
Finally, let's look at the 2Pass
operation in more detail.
First, I'll show you the back planes.
The green corresponds to the
back planes of the shadow volume.
Here are the front planes.
by rendering both the
backend front planes.
You can see the cyan is where the
backend front planes are both rendered.
The blue region is where
the front plane is rendered,
but not the back plane.
And you can see this blue region
corresponds to the shadow area.
Should I do this for a half
hour or should I continue?
I guess-- So in summary,
you saw how you can use shadow
volumes in Stencil Buffer
to-- Animal-to-Pass Effect to
create your shadow effect.
This will require both using a
sense buffer and a depth buffer.
And it's simple for my simple case,
but using it in a real scene may
be more complex than I presented.
So you may have to optimize both
your creation of your shadow volume
and the fill rate and filling it.